Milestone: The Archive is Live

Technical Milestones

Repository Lifecycle & Git Mastery

Remote Synchronization: Setup public GitHub repository (C-John/IBM-Quantum-Entropy-Archive) using the VS Code Git.

Environment Recovery: When the initial GitHub handshake hung, a reload window command forced VS Code to recognize the active session.

Professional Footprint: Established a proper README.md using Markdown syntax to define the project's architecture and legal status for potential employers.

Security 

The Vault Pattern: Created a .env file to store future API keys and a .gitignore to ensure those secrets—along with binary "noise" like Zone.Identifier and target/ folders—never reach the public.

IP Protection: Opted for an "All Rights Reserved" status instead of an MIT license to maintain ownership while still showcasing code.

Build Systems (Maven)

Dependency Injection: Authored a pom.xml to manage heavy-duty libraries like Apache Parquet and Hadoop, turning a standard Java setup into a data engineering workstation.

XML Troubleshooting: Resolved a Non-parseable POM error caused by an illegal # character at the start of the XML file, a common snag when switching between script styles and markup.

The Build Lifecycle: Executed mvn clean install to verify that the development container could download and link these external ingredients.

Architecture & Initial Logic

Directory Standards: Implemented the Standard Maven Directory Layout (src/main/java/com/calder/archive/).

Executed ArchiveEngine.java: proving the code environment can successfully initialize a Hadoop Configuration object for the Extract phase.

Phase 2: Secure Extraction & Environment Hardening
Unit Standards & Quantum Scale
•	Time Resolution: Defined and documented µs (microseconds) as the primary unit for T1 and T2 measurements, equating to one-millionth (10^-6) of a second.
•	Metric Context: Established the "Blink vs. Qubit" scale—where a human blink (~ 350,000 µs) outlasts a stable qubit state (~ 220 µs) by over 1,500 times.
Zero-Dependency Security (The Pure Java Pattern)
•	Library Sovereignty: Rejected third-party GitHub libraries (io.github.cdimascio:dotenv-java) in favor of built-in Java utilities to minimize security surface area.
•	Maven Purge Mastery: Executed mvn dependency:purge-local-repository and rm -rf to physically erase discarded external artifacts from the local .m2 repository.
•	Native File I/O: Implemented java.util.Properties combined with Try-with-Resources to safely stream secrets from .env while ensuring the file closes automatically to prevent memory leaks.
Modern Java Networking (The Handshake)
•	HttpClient Implementation: Leveraged the native java.net.http.HttpClient (available in OpenJDK 25) to perform asynchronous API requests without external HTTP clients.
•	Auth Lifecycle: Successfully validated the API handshake against the IBM Auth endpoint, confirming that the Extract phase is authenticated and ready to pull real-time hardware JSON.

OAuth2 & Identity Management (The Secure Exchange) 
•	IAM Integration: Successfully implemented the IBM Cloud Identity and Access Management (IAM) handshake, shifting from legacy subdomains to the official https://iam.cloud.ibm.com/identity/token endpoint.
•	Protocol Mastery: Hand-authored a POST request using application/x-www-form-urlencoded to securely exchange a static API key for a short-lived (60-minute) Bearer token.
•	Scope & Security: Verified token attributes including expires_in: 3600 and scope: ibm openid, ensuring the Extract phase follows modern enterprise security standards.
Environment Resilience 
•	DNS & Infrastructure Troubleshooting: Resolved a critical UnresolvedAddressException by diagnosing a Docker Engine failure and executing a WSL subsystem shutdown to reset the container's network bridge.
•	URL Migration: Successfully navigated the deprecation of legacy IBM Quantum endpoints, identifying and implementing the consolidated 2026 Cloud API structure.

Engineering Journal: Milestone Update
Timestamp: 2026-03-30 | 15:20 CST

Milestone: The Archive is Live
Repository Lifecycle & Git Mastery

Remote Synchronization: Setup public GitHub repository (C-John/IBM-Quantum-Entropy-Archive) using VS Code Git.

Environment Recovery: Resolved a GitHub handshake hang using the "reload window" command.

Professional Footprint: Established a README.md to define architecture and legal status.

Security & Build Systems

The Vault Pattern: Implemented .env and .gitignore to protect API keys and binary noise.

IP Protection: Selected "All Rights Reserved" status.

Dependency Injection: Authored pom.xml for Apache Parquet and Hadoop.

XML Troubleshooting: Fixed a Non-parseable POM error caused by an illegal character.

The Build Lifecycle: Verified environment with mvn clean install.

Architecture & Identity Management

Standard Layout: Implemented Maven directory standards.

Quantum Scale: Defined µs (microseconds) as the primary unit for T1/T2 stability measurements.

Library Sovereignty: Prioritized native Java utilities over third-party libraries for security.

IAM Integration: Implemented the IBM Cloud OAuth2 handshake.

Environment Resilience: Resolved UnresolvedAddressException via WSL subsystem reset.

URL Migration: Navigated the 2026 Cloud API structure consolidate.

Timestamp: 2026-03-30 | 15:53 CST

Scope & Closure Mastery: Resolved a Java(536871575) error by implementing a final variable snapshot, ensuring thread-safe access to configuration strings within asynchronous lambda closures.

Environment Optimization: Configured settings.json to enable automatic build synchronization and suppressed nullAnalysis to streamline the development workflow within the Java Dev Container.

Log Evolution: Officially transitioned from "Lessons Learned" to a formal Engineering Journal to better document the technical architecture and decision-making process for future stakeholders.

Engineering Journal: Final Entry

Timestamp: 2026-03-30 | 16:00 CST

Extraction Milestone: Successfully retrieved authenticated hardware metrics from the v1/backends endpoint, confirming the "Vault Pattern" and redirect logic are fully functional.

Data Verification: Confirmed visibility of complex hardware attributes, including coupling_maps and performance_metrics, marking the successful completion of the Extract phase.

Session Close: Java environment stabilized, token caching active, and raw data pipeline verified.

Engineering Journal: Milestone Update

Timestamp: 2026-04-01 | 10:15 CST

Data Lake Initialization & Parallel Extraction

Automated Extraction: Successfully executed the first pipeline step to pull the JSON file detailing the health of quantum machines.

Asynchronous Processing: Implemented CompletableFuture to run parallel HTTP GET requests for individual backend properties without blocking the main thread.

Data Partitioning: Engineered the local data lake structure by organizing folders by date and machine.

Initial Transformation: Initiated the Java Cleaning Engine to flatten and extract specific metrics. Successfully parsed the nested JSON tree to extract median two-qubit error rates.

Defensive Programming: Integrated robust validation to prevent null pointer exceptions when processing IBM API responses.

Timestamp: 2026-04-01 | 10:45 
CSTArchitectural Decoupling: Initiated the separation of Step 1 (Extract) and Step 2 (Transform) by creating a dedicated CleaningEngine.java.
Separation of Concerns: Opted to isolate network-heavy I/O logic in ArchiveEngine from the data serialization and flattening logic, following strict Object-Oriented design principles.
Schema Definition: Defined the QubitMetric internal class to serve as the blueprint for flattening complex hardware JSON into a columnar format suitable for Apache Parquet.
Environment Validation: Confirmed that existing Maven dependencies for Hadoop and Parquet are sufficient for the upcoming transformation phase, requiring no further pom.xml modifications.

Configuration Hardening: Transitioned IBM-API-Version from a hardcoded constant to an environment-controlled variable.
Dynamic TTL: Identified the path to replace static cache timers with live expires_in metadata from the IAM handshake.

Encapsulation Hardening: Transitioned from method-local parameter passing to class-level member variables to reduce stack overhead and improve readability.

Namespace Consolidation: Centralized API metadata (Version, CRN, and Auth endpoints) into private static fields, mimicking C++ header-style configuration management.

Timestamp: 2026-04-01 | 11:50 CST

Dynamic TTL & Two-File Vault: Successfully transitioned from hardcoded cache timers to a dynamic "Expiration Deadline" logic. Implemented a partner-file system (token.cache and token_expiry.cache) to ensure the Archive Engine remains synchronized with IBM’s security protocols without redundant API calls.

State Persistence: Integrated an updateLastRun() method to persist the pipeline’s execution history directly into the .env file, establishing a local audit trail for the automated workflow.

Encapsulation Refinement: Completed the refactoring of method-local variables into private static class-level members (e.g., client, serviceCRN, apiVersion) to minimize stack overhead and simplify the Standard Maven Directory Layout architecture.

Unit Normalization: Refactored "magic numbers" into named constants like BUFFER_SECONDS and MS_PER_SECOND, ensuring the dynamic TTL math is readable and aligned with standard data engineering practices.

Code Cleanup: Identified and removed redundant fields, such as tokenExpiryTime, after verifying the Two-File System successfully handles absolute time persistence between project runs.

Timestamp: 2026-04-02 | 11:15 CST

Milestone: Architectural Visualization & Logic Mapping

Diagram as Code (Mermaid) Mastery

Syntax Implementation: Successfully learned and implemented Mermaid.js syntax to define the project's data flow using a "Diagram as Code" approach.

Logic Mapping: Authored a flowchart for the CleaningEngine using graph TD to visualize the transformation from raw JSON to structured Parquet.

Visual Refinement: Implemented custom classDef styling to color-code logic loops, improving the readability of complex architectural documentation.

The Double-Loop Transformation Logic

Outer Loop (File Iteration): Defined the logic to traverse the daily data lake folders and ingest individual backend machine files (e.g., ibm_kingston.json).

Inner Loop (Qubit Flattening): Mapped the "one-to-many" relationship between a machine and its hardware components, necessitating an inner loop to extract metrics for every individual qubit into the QubitMetric blueprint.

Data Consolidation: Validated the "Batch Load" strategy, choosing to aggregate all machine data into a single daily_snapshot.parquet file for optimized Power BI performance.

Documentation Sovereignty & Environment Hardening

Zero-Extension Policy: Opted to store Mermaid diagrams as raw text strings rather than installing third-party VS Code extensions, maintaining a "Zero-Dependency" environment.

Library Sovereignty: Aligned documentation practices with the project's security posture by rejecting non-essential software, ensuring the environment remains reproducible and hardened.

Code Resilience & Schema Adaptation

Polymorphic JSON Handling: Refactored the ArchiveEngine device loop to handle inconsistent IBM API responses (Strings vs. Objects) using ternary logic and JsonNode type checking.

GitHub Synchronization: Successfully pushed logic fixes to the remote repository, finalizing the Extract phase and officially initiating the Transform phase.

Timestamp: 2026-04-02 | 12:20 CST

Milestone: Strategic Pivot & Knowledge Consolidation

Architecture Pause: Halted the Transform phase implementation to rebuild a formal foundational understanding of modern Java syntax and Object-Oriented patterns.

Resource Allocation: Pivoting to university-level academic lectures (UC Berkeley CS61B) to bridge the gap between legacy C/C++ memory management concepts and modern Java data structures.

Pipeline Status: The Archive Extraction phase remains stable and functional. Pipeline development is officially on hold pending successful completion of academic review.